# Article  
OrthoFinder2: fast and accurate phylogenomic orthology analysis from gene sequences

# Authors  
* Emms D.M.
* Kelly S.

# Journal and Year  
bioRxiv (2018)  

# Highlights  

## 1. Comparison to other orthology inference strategies and justification for OrthoFinder development  
* (...) a number of methods have been developed that approximate phylogenetic relationships between genes using ‘reciprocal best hits’ (RBH) obtained from BLAST scores. Notable methods include InParanoid, OrthoMCL and OMA. However, common evolutionary events such as gene duplication can lead to misidentification of orthology relationships using these approximate methods that would otherwise be resolvable using phylogenetic trees of genes. As orthology is defined by phylogenetic relationship, it follows that relationships between genes should be more accurately resolved using phylogenetic trees. However, methods for genome-wide ortholog inference using gene trees are unavailable.

## 2. Main steps  
OrthoFinder is composed of three principal stages:   
  1. first, orthogroup inference;  
  2. second, inference of rooted species and gene trees;   
  3. and third, the inference of orthologs and gene duplication events from these rooted gene trees

## 3. Some possible analysis optimizations/customizations  
* "OrthoFinder has also been designed to allow the use of alternative methods for tree inference and sequence search to allow users to choose the balance between accuracy and speed suitable to their research. For example, BLAST 15 or MMseqs2 16 can be used for sequence similarity searches in place of DIAMOND, and gene trees can be automatically inferred from multiple sequence alignments using any user preferred alignment and tree inference method. Moreover, if the species tree is known prior to the analysis, this can be provided as input, rather than inferred by OrthoFinder."

## 4. Assessing OrthoFinder accuracy  
*  OrthoFinder (in multiple standard configurations) was submitted to the Quest for Orthologs (QfO) benchmarking server  
  * All versions of OrthoFinder inferred more orthologs (higher recall/recovered ortholog sets—see methods) than all other tested methods

## 5. Workflow steps in more detail  
1. Orthogroup inference  
    * An orthogroup is the set of genes from multiple species descended from a single gene in the last common ancestor of a set of species.  
    * Since gene tree inference scales more slowly than linearly in the number of taxa, partitioning genes into the smallest possible sets is the most efficient way of constructing a set of gene trees that encompass all orthology relationships  
    * The original OrthoFinder orthogroup inference method is still the most accurate method on the independent Orthobench test set and thus is used for this step.
2. Gene tree inference
    * In this step gene trees will be calculated for each orthogroup. OrthoFinder provides two methods for gene tree inference:  
      * Dendroblast, which is the default method, uses sequence similarity scores defined in Step 1 to build trees in a fast, but yet accurate way  
      * The alternative method infers multiple sequence alignments (MSA) and infers trees from these MSA. This is a more traditional tree inference method. If a user wants to use it instead of Dendroblast, the recommendation is to first run OrthoFinder in default mode (i.e. using Dendroblast), and then re-run it starting from the Gene tree inference step. That allows the user to skip the computationally costly all-versus-all sequence search from Step 1.
3. Species tree inference  
    * The **rooted species tree** is required by OrthoFinder in order to **identify the correct out-group** in each gene tree, as correct out-group rooting **influences the orthology assignments** from that tree
    * If the user knows in advance the species tree, it can input it to OrthoFinder in a Newick text format
    * Otherwise, OrthoFinder will try to infer the species tree, using the Species Tree from All Genes (STAG) algorithm. This algorithm was developed to allow species tree inferences even when few or none complete sets of **one-to-one orthologues** are present. This is important because although one-to-one orthologues are preferrable for species tree inference, they may be rare, especially for large scale comparative genomics analyses.  
4. Species tree rooting  
    * 

# TO DO  
* Continue reading from page 7 on [link here](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/466201v1.full.pdf)

# New tools to take a look  
* blabla

# New data types to take a look  
* blabla

# Questions  
* How does the original orthogroup inference strategy (from OrthoFinder1) work? 
